

ALICE

Where I am now, of course.


CAT

Not you. You'd be nowhere. Why, you're only a sort of thing in his dream;
and you're mad too.


ALICE

How do you know I'm mad?


CAT

You must be, or you wouldn't have come here.


ALICE

How do you know that you're mad?


CAT

To begin with, a dog's not mad. You grant that?


ALICE

I suppose so.


CAT

Well then, you see a dog growls when it's angry, and wags its tail when
it's pleased. Now I growl when I'm pleased, and wag my tail when I'm
angry. Therefore I'm mad.


ALICE

I call it purring, not growling.


[Illustration]


CAT

Call it what you like. Do you play croquet with the Queen today?


ALICE

I should like it very much, but I haven't been invited yet.


CAT

You'll see me there.

[_Vanishes._]


ALICE

[_To squirming baby._]

Oh, dear, it's heavy and so ugly. Don't grunt--Oh--Oh--it's a--pig. Please
Mr. Footman take it!


FROG

[_Rises with dignity, whistles and disappears into the house; a kettle
comes bounding out. ALICE puts pig down and it crawls off._]


CAT

[_Appearing again._]

By-the-bye, what became of the baby?


ALICE

It turned into a pig.


CAT

I thought it would.

[_Vanishes._]

[_FROG comes out of the house with hedgehogs and flamingoes._]


CAT

[_Reappearing._]

Did you say pig, or fig?


ALICE

I said pig; and I wish you wouldn't keep appearing and vanishing so
suddenly; you make one quite giddy.


CAT

All right. [_It vanishes slowly._]

[_FROG puts flamingoes down and reenters house. While ALICE is examining
the flamingoes curiously, TWEEDLEDUM and TWEEDLEDEE, each with an arm
round the other's neck, sidestep in and stand looking at ALICE._]


ALICE

[_Turns, sees them, starts in surprise and involuntarily whispers._]

Tweedle--dee.


DUM

Dum!


DEE

If you think we're waxworks, you ought to pay.


DUM

Contrariwise, if you think we're alive, you ought to speak.


DEE

The first thing in a visit is to say "How d'ye do?" and shake hands!

[_The brothers give each other a hug, then hold out the two hands that are
free, to shake hands with her. ALICE does not like shaking hands with
either of them first, for fear of hurting the other one's feelings; she
takes hold of both hands at once and they all dance round in a ring, quite
naturally to music, "Here we go round the mulberry bush."_]


ALICE

Would you tell me which road leads out of--


DEE

What shall I repeat to her?


DUM

The "Walrus and the Carpenter" is the longest.

[_Gives his brother an affectionate hug._]


DEE

  The sun was shining--


ALICE

If it's very long, would you please tell me first which road--


DEE

  The moon was shining sulkily.

DUM

  The sea was wet as wet could be--


DEE

  O Oysters, come and walk with us
    The Walrus did beseech--


DUM

[_Looks at DEE._]

  A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
    Along the briny beach--


DEE

[_Looks at DUM._]

  The eldest Oyster winked his eye
    And shook his heavy head--


DUM

[_Looks at DEE._]

  Meaning to say he did not choose
    To leave the oyster bed.


DEE

  But four young Oysters hurried up
    And yet another four--


DUM

  And thick and fast they came at last,
    And more, and more, and more--


DEE

  The Walrus and the Carpenter
    Walked on a mile or so,


DUM

  And then they rested on a rock
    Conveniently low,


DEE

  And all the little Oysters stood
    And waited in a row.


DUM

  "A loaf of bread," the Walrus said,
    "Is what we chiefly need.


DEE

  Now if you're ready, Oysters dear,
    We can begin to feed."


DUM

  "But not on us!" the Oysters cried,
    Turning a little blue.


DEE

  "The night is fine," the Walrus said,
    "Do you admire the view?"


DUM

  The Carpenter said nothing but
    "Cut us another slice.
  I wish you were not quite so deaf--
    I've had to ask you twice!"


DEE

  "It seems a shame," the Walrus said,
    "To play them such a trick,
  After we've brought them out so far,
    And made them trot so quick!"


DUM

  "O, Oysters," said the Carpenter,
    "You've had a pleasant run!


DEE

  Shall we be trotting home again?"


DUM

  But answer came there none--


DEE

  And this was scarcely odd, because


DUM

  They'd eaten every--


DEE

[_Interrupts in a passion, pointing to a white rattle on the ground._]

Do you see _that_?


ALICE

It's only a rattle--


DUM

[_Stamps wildly and tears his hair._]

I knew it was! It's spoilt of course. My nice new rattle!

[_To DEE._]

You agree to have a battle?

[_He collects sauce pans and pots._]


DEE

[_Picks up a sauce pan._]

I suppose so. Let's fight till dinner.

[_They go out hand in hand._]


ALICE

[_Hears music._]

I wonder what is going to happen next.

[_She backs down stage respectfully as the KING and QUEEN OF HEARTS enter,
followed by the KNAVE OF HEARTS carrying the KING'S crown on a crimson
velvet cushion, and the WHITE RABBIT and others. When they come opposite
to ALICE they stop and look at her._]

[_The DUCHESS comes out of her house._]


QUEEN

[_To the KNAVE._]

Who is this?


[Illustration]


KNAVE

[_Bows three times, smiles and giggles._]


QUEEN

Idiot! What's your name, child?


ALICE

My name is Alice, so please your Majesty.


QUEEN

Off with her head! Off--


ALICE

Nonsense!


KING

Consider, my dear, she is only a child.


QUEEN

Can you play croquet?


ALICE

Yes.


QUEEN

Come on then. Get to your places. Where are the mallets?


DUCHESS

Here.

[_The FROG appears with the flamingoes and hedgehogs._]


QUEEN

Off with his head!

[_No one pays any attention._]


KNAVE

What fun!


ALICE

What is the fun?


KNAVE

Why she; it's all her fancy, that. They never execute anyone.


ALICE

What does one do?


QUEEN

Get to your places!

[_She takes a flamingo, uses its neck as a mallet and a hedgehog as a
ball. The FROG doubles himself into an arch. The KING does the same with
the followers and the KNAVE offers himself as an arch for ALICE. Even
though ALICE does not notice him he holds the arch position. The QUEEN
shouts at intervals, "Off with his head, off with her head."_]


ALICE

Where are the Chess Queens?


RABBIT

Under sentence of execution.


ALICE

What for?


RABBIT

Did you say, "what a pity"?


ALICE

No, I didn't. I don't think it's at all a pity. I said, "What for?"


RABBIT

They boxed the Queen's ears.

[_ALICE gives a little scream of laughter._]


RABBIT

Oh, hush! The Queen will hear you! You see they came rather late and the
Queen said--Oh dear, the Queen hears me--

[_He hurries away._]


ALICE

[_Noticing the KNAVE who still pretends to be an arch._]

How _can_ you go on thinking so quietly, with your head downwards?


KNAVE

What does it matter where my body happens to be? My mind goes on working
just the same. The fact of it is, the more head downwards I am, the more I
keep on inventing new things.


KING

Did you happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you came through the
wood?


ALICE

Yes, I did; several thousand I should think.


KING

Four thousand, two hundred and seven, that's the exact number. They
couldn't send all the horses, you know, because two of them are wanted in
the game. And I haven't sent the two messengers, either.


ALICE

What's the war about?


KING

The red Chess King has the whole army against us but he can't kill a man
who has thirteen hearts.

[_The DUCHESS, QUEEN, FROG, and followers go out. The KNAVE and the
FIVE-SPOT, SEVEN-SPOT, and NINE-SPOT OF HEARTS stand behind the KING._]


[Illustration: KING: I only wish I had such eyes; to be able to see
Nobody!]


KING

Just look along the road and tell me if you can see either of my
messengers.


ALICE

I see nobody on the road.


KING

I only wish I had such eyes; to be able to see Nobody! And at that
distance too! Why, it's as much as I can do to see real people, by this
light.


ALICE

I see somebody now! But he's coming very slowly--and what curious
attitudes he goes into--skipping up and down, and wriggling like an eel.


KING

Not at all, those are Anglo-Saxon attitudes. He only does them when he's
happy. I must have two messengers, you know--to come and go. One to come
and one to go.


ALICE

I beg your pardon?


KING

It isn't respectable to beg.


ALICE

I only meant that I didn't understand. Why one to come and one to go?


KING

Don't I tell you? I must have two--to fetch and carry. One to fetch, and
one to carry.


MARCH HARE

[_Enters, pants for breath--waves his hands about and makes fearful faces
at the KING._]


KING

You alarm me! I feel faint--give me a ham sandwich. Another sandwich!


MARCH HARE

There's nothing but hay left now.


KING

Hay, then. There's nothing like eating hay when you're faint.


ALICE

I should think throwing cold water over you would be better.


KING

I didn't say there was nothing _better_; I said there was nothing _like_
it.


KING

Who did you pass on the road?


MARCH HARE

Nobody.


KING

Quite right; this young lady saw him too. So of course Nobody walks slower
than you.


MARCH HARE

I do my best; I'm sure nobody walks much faster than I do.


KING

He can't do that; or else he'd have been here first. However, now you've
got your breath, you may tell us what's happened in the town.


MARCH HARE

I'll whisper it.

[_Much to ALICE'S surprise, he shouts into the KING'S ear._]

They're at it again!


KING

Do you call _that_ a whisper? If you do such a thing again, I'll have you
buttered. It went through and through my head like an earthquake. Give me
details, quick!

[_The KING and MARCH HARE go out, followed by FIVE, SEVEN, and NINE
SPOTS._]


DUCHESS

[_Runs in and tucks her arm affectionately into ALICE'S._]

You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!


ALICE

Oh!


DUCHESS

You're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to
talk. I can't tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall
remember it in a bit.


ALICE

Perhaps it hasn't one.


DUCHESS

Tut, tut, child! Everything's got a moral, if only you can find it.

[_Squeezes closely, digs her chin into ALICE'S shoulder, and roughly drags
ALICE along for a walk._]


ALICE

The game's going on rather better now.


DUCHESS

'Tis so, and the moral of that is--"Oh, 'tis love, 'tis love, that makes
the world go round!"


ALICE

Somebody said, that it's done by everybody minding their own business.


DUCHESS

Ah, well! It means much the same thing, and the moral of _that_ is--"Take
care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves."


ALICE

How fond you are of finding morals in things.


DUCHESS

I daresay you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your waist. The
reason is, that I'm doubtful about the temper of your flamingo. Shall I
try the experiment?


ALICE

He might bite.


DUCHESS

Very true; flamingoes and mustard both bite. And the moral of that
is--"Birds of a feather flock together."


ALICE

Only mustard isn't a bird.


DUCHESS

Right, as usual; what a clear way you have of putting things.


ALICE

It's a mineral, I _think_.


DUCHESS

Of course it is; there's a large mustard mine near here. And the moral of
that is--"The more there is of mine, the less there is of yours."


ALICE

Oh! I know, it's a vegetable. It doesn't look like one, but it is.


DUCHESS

I quite agree with you, and the moral of that is--"Be what you would seem
to be;" or, if you'd like it put more simply, "Never imagine yourself not
to be otherwise than what it might appear to others that what you were or
might have been was not otherwise than what you had been would have
appeared to them to be otherwise."


ALICE

I think I should understand that better if I had it written down, but I
can't quite follow it as you say it.


DUCHESS

That's nothing to what I could say if I chose.


ALICE

Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that.


DUCHESS

Oh, don't talk about trouble; I make you a present of everything I've said
as yet.


ALICE

Uhm!


DUCHESS

Thinking again?


ALICE

I've got a right to think.


DUCHESS

Just about as much right as pigs have to fly, and the moral--

[_The arm of the DUCHESS begins to tremble and her voice dies down. The
QUEEN OF HEARTS stands before them with folded arms and frowning like a
thunderstorm._]


DUCHESS

A fine day, your Majesty.


QUEEN

Now, I give you fair warning, either you or your head must be off, and
that in about half no time. Take your choice!

[_The DUCHESS goes meekly into the house._]


[Illustration]


QUEEN

Let's go on with the game.

[_She goes off and shouts at intervals, "Off with his head; off with her
head."_]


CAT

How are you getting on?


ALICE

It's no use speaking to you till your ears have come. I don't think they
play at all fairly and they all quarrel so and they don't seem to have any
rules in particular. And you've no idea how confusing it is with all the
things alive; there's the arch I've got to go through next walking about
at the other end of the ground--and I should have croqueted the Queen's
hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming.

[_Music begins._]


CAT

How do you like the Queen?


ALICE

Not at all; she's so extremely--

[_The KING, QUEEN and entire court enter. The QUEEN is near to ALICE. The
music stops and all look at ALICE questioningly._]

[_ALICE tries to propitiate the QUEEN._]

--likely to win,

[_Music continues._]

that it's hardly worth while finishing the game.

[_QUEEN smiles and passes on._]


KING

Who _are_ you talking to?


ALICE

It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat--allow me to introduce it.


KING

I don't like the look of it at all; however, it may kiss my hand if it
likes.


CAT

I'd rather not.


KING

Don't be impertinent and don't look at me like that.


ALICE

A cat may look at a king. I've read that in some book, but I don't
remember where.


KING

Well, it must be removed. My dear! I wish you would have this cat removed.


QUEEN

Off with his head!


KNAVE

But you can't cut off a head unless there's a body to cut it off from.


KING

Anything that has a head can be beheaded.


QUEEN

If something isn't done about it in less than no time, I'll have everybody
executed, all round.


ALICE

It belongs to the Duchess; you'd better ask her about it.


DUCHESS

It's a lie!


CAT

You'd better ask me. Do it if you can.

[_It grins away. The DUCHESS and FROG escape into the house._]


QUEEN

Cut it off!


KING

It's gone.


EVERYBODY

It's gone! It's gone! Where, where, where--


QUEEN

Cut it off. Cut them all off!


EVERYBODY

No, no, no!


ALICE

Save me, save me!


KNAVE

[_Shouts to ALICE and gives her a tart for safety._]

Take a tart!


QUEEN

[_Seeing ALICE stand out a moment from the others._]

Cut hers off! Cut hers off!


OTHERS

[_Glad to distract QUEEN'S attention from themselves._]

Cut hers off, cut hers off, cut--


ALICE

[_Cries in fear and takes a quick bite at the tart. If there is a trap
door on the stage ALICE disappears down it, leaving the crowd circling
around the hole screaming and amazed. If the stage has no trap door, a
bridge is built across the footlights with stairs leading down into the
orchestra pit. When the crowd is chasing ALICE she jumps over the
footlights onto the bridge and as the curtain is falling dividing her from
the crowd she appeals to the audience, "Save me, save me, who will save
me?" and runs down the stairs and disappears._]

CURTAIN




ACT III


SCENE ONE

_Is a garden of high, very conventional and artificial looking flowers. On
a large mushroom sits the CATERPILLAR smoking a hookah. ALICE is whirling
about trying to get her equilibrium after her fall. She goes to the
mushroom timidly and, conscious of her size, for her chin reaches the top
of the mushroom, she gazes at the CATERPILLAR wonderingly. He looks at her
lazily and speaks in a languid voice._


CATERPILLAR

Who are you?


ALICE

I--I hardly know, sir, just at present. The Queen frightened me so and
I've had an awfully funny fall down a tunnel or a sort of well. At least I
know who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I must have been
changed several times since then.


CATERPILLAR

What do you mean by that? Explain yourself.


ALICE

I can't explain myself, I'm afraid, Sir, because I'm not myself, you see.
Being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.


[Illustration]


CATERPILLAR

You! Who are you?


ALICE

I think you ought to tell me who you are, first.


CATERPILLAR

Why?

[_As ALICE turns away._]

Come back. I've something important to say.

[_ALICE comes back._]

Keep your temper.


ALICE

Is that all?


CATERPILLAR

No.

[_He puffs at the hookah in silence; finally takes it out of his mouth and
unfolds his arms._]

So you think you're changed, do you?


ALICE

I'm afraid I am, Sir; I don't keep the same size.


CATERPILLAR

What size do you want to be?


ALICE

I don't know. At least I've never been so small as a caterpillar.


CATERPILLAR

[_Rears angrily._]

It is a very good height indeed.


ALICE

But I'm not used to it; I wish you wouldn't all be so easily offended.


CATERPILLAR

You'll get used to it in time.


ALICE

Are you too big or am I too small?

[_She compares her height wonderingly with the tall flowers._]


CATERPILLAR

[_Looks at her sleepily, yawns, shakes himself, slides down from the
mushroom and crawls slowly away._]

One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you grow
shorter.


ALICE

One side of what? The other side of what?


CATERPILLAR

Of the mushroom.

[_ALICE hesitates, then embraces mushroom and picks bit from each side._]

[_Three gardeners representing spades enter carrying brushes and red paint
cans._]


TWO-SPOT

Look out now, Five. Don't go splashing paint over me like that.


FIVE-SPOT

I couldn't help it. Seven jogged my elbow.


SEVEN-SPOT

That's right, Five, always lay the blame on others.


FIVE-SPOT

You'd better not talk. I heard the Queen say only yesterday you deserved
to be beheaded.


TWO-SPOT

What for?


SEVEN-SPOT

That's none of your business, Two.


FIVE-SPOT

Yes, it is his business, and I'll tell him. It was for bringing the cook
tulip roots instead of onions.


SEVEN-SPOT

Well, of all the unjust things--

[_Sees ALICE; others look around, all bow._]


ALICE

Could you please tell me what side to eat?

[_FIVE and SEVEN look at TWO._]


TWO-SPOT

I don't know anything about it.

[_He paints a white rose, red._]

You ought to have been red, we put you in by mistake, and if the Queen was
to find it out we should all have our heads cut off.

[_A thumping is heard off stage and the music grows louder and louder._]


ALICE

What's that?


FIVE-SPOT

The White Chess Queen.


SEVEN-SPOT

Don't let her see what we are doing.


TWO-SPOT

She'll tell on us.


SEVEN-SPOT

Run out and stop her from coming here.


FIVE-SPOT

[_To ALICE as she runs to the right._]

No, no, the other way.


ALICE

But she's off there!


TWO-SPOT

You can only meet her by walking the other way.


ALICE

Oh! what nonsense.


ALL THE GARDENERS

Go the other way!


ALICE

[_Re-enters in dismay and dashes out to the left._]

She's running away from me.

[_The WHITE QUEEN backs in from right and ALICE backs in from left. They
meet. The gardeners cry "The Queen" and throw themselves flat upon the
ground; their backs are like the backs of the rest of the pack. Music
stops. ALICE looks at the QUEEN curiously._]


ALICE

Oh, there you are! Why, I'm just the size I was when I saw you last.


WHITE QUEEN

Of course you are, and who are these? I can't tell them by their backs.

[_She turns them over with her foot._]

Turn over. Ah! I thought so! Get up! What have you been doing here?


TWO-SPOT

May it please your Majesty, we were trying--


WHITE QUEEN

[_Examines rose._]

I see! Begone, or I'll send the horses after you, and tell the Queen of
Hearts.

[_GARDENERS rush off. The RED QUEEN enters. ALICE has gone to the mushroom
again to look at its sides and there to her amazement finds a gold crown
and scepter, which she immediately appropriates. Music. The QUEENS watch
ALICE superciliously. ALICE puts on her crown, proudly exclaiming in great
elation, "Queen Alice," and walks down stage bowing right and left to the
homage of imaginary subjects. She repeats as if scarcely daring to believe
it true, "Queen Alice." Music stops._]


RED QUEEN

Ridiculous!


ALICE

Isn't this the Eighth Square?


RED QUEEN

You can't be a Queen, you know, till you've passed the proper examination.


WHITE QUEEN

The sooner we begin it, the better.


ALICE

Please, would you tell me--


RED QUEEN

Speak when you're spoken to.


ALICE

But if everybody obeyed that rule, and if you only spoke when you were
spoken to, and the other person always waited for you to begin, you see
nobody would ever say anything, so that--


RED QUEEN

Preposterous.


ALICE

I only said "if."


RED QUEEN

She says she only said "if."


WHITE QUEEN

[_Moans and wrings her hands._]

But she said a great deal more than that. Ah, yes, so much more than that.


RED QUEEN

So you did, you know; always speak the truth--think before you speak--and
write it down afterwards.


ALICE

I'm sure I didn't mean--


RED QUEEN

That's just what I complained of. You _should_ have meant! What do you
suppose is the use of a child without any meaning? Even a joke should have
some meaning--and a child's more important than a joke, I hope. You
couldn't deny that, even if you tried with both hands.


ALICE

I don't deny things with my _hands_.


RED QUEEN

Nobody said you did. I said you couldn't if you tried.


WHITE QUEEN

She's in that state of mind, that she wants to deny _something_--only she
doesn't know what to deny!


RED QUEEN

A nasty, vicious temper. I invite you to Alice's dinner party this
afternoon.


WHITE QUEEN

And I invite _you_.


ALICE

I didn't know I was to have a party at all; but if there is to be one, I
think I ought to invite the guests.


RED QUEEN

We gave you the opportunity of doing it, but I dare say you've not had
many lessons in manners yet.


ALICE

Manners are not taught in lessons; lessons teach you to do sums, and
things of that sort.


WHITE QUEEN

Can you do addition? What's one and one and one and one and one and one
and one and one and one and one?


ALICE

I don't know. I lost count.


RED QUEEN

She can't do addition; can you do subtraction? Take nine from eight.


ALICE

Nine from eight I can't, you know, but--


WHITE QUEEN

She can't do subtraction. Can you do division? Divide a loaf by a
knife--what's the answer to that?


ALICE

I suppose--


RED QUEEN

[_Answers for her._]

Bread and butter, of course. Try another subtraction sum. Take a bone from
a dog; what remains?


ALICE

The bone wouldn't remain, of course, if I took it--and the dog wouldn't
remain; it would come to bite me--and I'm sure I shouldn't remain.


RED QUEEN

Then you think nothing would remain?


ALICE

I think that's the answer.


RED QUEEN

Wrong as usual; the dog's temper would remain.


ALICE

But I don't see how--


RED QUEEN

Why, look here; the dog would lose its temper, wouldn't it?


ALICE

Perhaps it would.


RED QUEEN

Then if the dog went away, its temper would remain!


ALICE

They might go different ways! What dreadful nonsense we _are_ talking.


BOTH QUEENS

She can't do sums a bit!


ALICE

Can _you_ do sums?


WHITE QUEEN

I can do addition, if you give me time--but I can't do _subtraction_ under
_any_ circumstances.


RED QUEEN

Of course you know your A, B, C?


ALICE

To be sure I do.


WHITE QUEEN

So do I; we'll often say it over together, dear. And I'll tell you a
secret--I can read words of one letter. Isn't that grand? However, don't
be discouraged. You'll come to it in time.


RED QUEEN

Can you answer useful questions? How is bread made?


ALICE

I know _that_! You take some flour--


WHITE QUEEN

Where do you pick the flower? In a garden or in the hedges?


ALICE

Well, it isn't _picked_ at all. It's ground--


WHITE QUEEN

How many acres of ground? You mustn't leave out so many things.


RED QUEEN

Fan her head! She'll be feverish after so much thinking.

[_They fan her with bunches of leaves which blow her hair wildly._]


ALICE

Please--please--


RED QUEEN

She's all right again now. Do you know languages? What's the French for
fiddle-de-dee?


ALICE

Fiddle-de-dee's not English.


RED QUEEN

Who ever said it was?


ALICE

If you tell me what language fiddle-de-dee is, I'll tell you the French
for it!


RED QUEEN

Queens never make bargains!


ALICE

I wish Queens never asked questions!


WHITE QUEEN

Don't let us quarrel; what is the cause of lightning?


ALICE

The cause of lightning is the thunder--no, no! I meant the other way.


RED QUEEN

It's too late to correct it; when you've once said a thing, that fixes it,
and you must take the consequences.


WHITE QUEEN

We had _such_ a thunderstorm next Tuesday, you can't think.


RED QUEEN

She _never_ could, you know.


WHITE QUEEN

Part of the roof came off, and ever so much thunder got in--and it went
rolling round the room in great lumps--and knocking over the tables and
things--till I was so frightened, I couldn't remember my own name!


ALICE

I never should _try_ to remember my name in the middle of an accident.
Where would be the use of it?


RED QUEEN

You must excuse her. She means well, but she can't help saying foolish
things, as a general rule. She never was really well brought up, but it's
amazing how good tempered she is! Pat her on the head, and see how pleased
she'll be! A little kindness and putting her hair in papers would do
wonders with her.


WHITE QUEEN

[_Gives a deep sigh and leans her head on ALICE'S shoulder._]

I _am_ so sleepy!


RED QUEEN

She's tired, poor thing; smooth her hair--lend her your night cap--and
sing her a soothing lullaby.


ALICE

I haven't got a night cap with me, and I don't know any soothing
lullabies.


RED QUEEN

I must do it myself, then.


[Illustration: ALICE: Do wake up, you heavy things!]


  Hush-a-by lady, in Alice's lap!
  Till the feast's ready, we've time for a nap;
  When the feast's over, we'll go to the ball--
  Red Queen and White Queen and Alice and all!

And now you know the words.

[_She puts her head on ALICE'S other shoulder._]

Just sing it through to _me_. I'm getting sleepy too.

[_Both queens fall fast asleep and snore loudly._]


ALICE

What _am_ I to do? Take care of two Queens asleep at once? Do wake up, you
heavy things!

[_All lights go out, leaving a mysterious glow on ALICE and the queens._]


WHITE RABBIT

[_Blows trumpet off stage._]

The trial's beginning!


ALICE

What trial is it?


WHITE RABBIT

Who stole the tarts.


ALICE

I ate a tart.


WHITE RABBIT

You've got to be tried.


ALICE

I don't want to be tried.


WHITE RABBIT

You've got to be tried.


ALICE

I won't be tried--I won't-I won't!


SCENE TWO

_Is a court room suggesting playing cards. The jurymen are all kinds of
creatures. The KING and QUEEN OF HEARTS are seated on the throne. The
KNAVE is before them in chains. The WHITE RABBIT has a trumpet in one
hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the middle of the court
stands a table with a large dish of tarts upon it._


WHITE RABBIT

[_Blows three blasts on his trumpet._]

Silence in the court!


ALICE

[_Watches jurymen writing busily on their slates._]

What are they doing? They can't have anything to put down yet, before the
trial's begun.


KNAVE

They're putting down their names for fear they should forget them before
the end of the trial.


ALICE

Stupid things!


WHITE RABBIT

Silence in the court!


JURORS

[_Write in chorus._]

Stupid things!


ONE JUROR

How do you spell stupid?


ALICE

A nice muddle their slates will be in before the trial's over.


QUEEN

There's a pencil squeaking. Cut it down!


JURORS

[_In chorus as they write._]

Squeaking--


KING

[_Wears a crown over his wig; puts on his spectacles as he says._]

Herald, read the accusation!


[Illustration]


WHITE RABBIT

[_Blows three blasts on his trumpet, unrolls parchment scroll and reads to
music._]

  The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
    All on a summer day;
  The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
    And took them quite away!


KING

Consider your verdict!


WHITE RABBIT

Not yet, not yet; there's a great deal to come before that.


KING

Call the first witness.


WHITE RABBIT

First witness!


HATTER

[_Comes in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of bread and butter in
the other._]

I beg your pardon, your Majesty, for bringing these in, but I hadn't quite
finished my tea when I was sent for.


KING

You ought to have finished; when did you begin?


HATTER

[_Looks at the MARCH HARE, who follows him arm-in-arm with the DORMOUSE._]

Fourteenth of March, I _think_ it was.


MARCH HARE

Fifteenth.


DORMOUSE

Sixteenth.


KING

Write that down.


JURY

Fourteen, fifteen, sixteen--forty-five. Reduce that to shillings--


KING

Take off your hat.


HATTER

It isn't mine.


KING

_Stolen!_


JURY

Stolen!


HATTER

I keep them to sell. I've none of my own. I'm a hatter.


QUEEN OF HEARTS

[_Puts on her spectacles and stares at HATTER, who fidgets uncomfortably._]


KING

Give your evidence and don't be nervous, or I'll have you executed on the
spot.

[_The HATTER continues to shift nervously from one foot to the other,
looks uneasily at the QUEEN, trembles so that he shakes off both of his
shoes, and in his confusion bites a large piece out of his teacup instead
of the bread and butter._]


HATTER

I'm a poor man, your Majesty, and I hadn't but just begun my tea--not
above a week or so--and what with the bread and butter getting so
thin--and the twinkling of the tea--


KING

The twinkling of _what_?


HATTER

It began with the tea.


KING

Of course twinkling begins with a T. Do you take me for a dunce? Go on!


HATTER

I'm a poor man and most things twinkled after that--only the March Hare
said--


MARCH HARE

I didn't!


HATTER

You did.


MARCH HARE

I deny it.


KING

He denies it; leave out that part.


QUEEN

But what did the Dormouse say?


HATTER

That I can't remember.


KING

You _must_ remember or I'll have you executed.


HATTER

[_Drops teacup and bread and butter and goes down on one knee._]

I'm a poor man, your Majesty.


KING

If that's all you know about it you may stand down.


HATTER

I can't go no lower; I'm on the floor as it is.


KING

Then you may sit down.


HATTER

I'd rather finish my tea.


KING

You may go.

[_The HATTER goes out hurriedly, leaving one of his shoes behind._]


QUEEN

[_Nonchalantly to an officer._]

And just take his head off outside.

[_But the HATTER was out of sight before the officer could get to the
door._]


KING

Call the next witness!


WHITE RABBIT

Next witness!

[_The DUCHESS enters with a pepper pot, which she shakes about.
Everybody begins to sneeze. MARCH HARE sneezes and rushes out._]


KING

Give your evidence!


DUCHESS

Shan't!


WHITE RABBIT

Your Majesty must cross-examine _this_ witness.


KING

Well, if I must, I must. What does your cook say tarts are made of?


DUCHESS

Pepper.

[_The DUCHESS shakes the pot and the court sneezes._]


DORMOUSE

Treacle!

[_The DUCHESS shakes the pot at him. He sneezes for the first time._]


QUEEN

Collar the Dormouse! Behead the Dormouse! Turn that Dormouse out of court!
Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his whiskers!

[_The whole court is in confusion, turning the DORMOUSE out, and while
it is settling down again the DUCHESS disappears._]


WHITE RABBIT

The Duchess!


COURT

She's gone--she's gone.


KING

Never mind!

[_In a low tone to the QUEEN._]

Really, my dear, _you_ must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes
my forehead ache! Call the next witness!


WHITE RABBIT

[_Fumbles with the parchment, then cries in a shrill little voice._]

Alice!


ALICE

Here!


KING

What do you know about this business?


ALICE

Nothing whatever.


KING

[_To the jury._]

That's very important.


WHITE RABBIT

_Un_important, your Majesty means, of course.


KING

_Un_important, of course I meant. Important--unimportant--unimportant--
important. Consider your verdict!

[_Some of the jury write "important" and some write "unimportant."_]


WHITE RABBIT

There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty; this paper has
just been picked up.


QUEEN

What's in it?


WHITE RABBIT

[_Fumbles with a huge envelope._]

I haven't opened it yet, but it seems to be a letter, written by the
prisoner to--to somebody.


KING

It must have been that unless it was written to nobody, which isn't usual,
you know.


ALICE

Who is it directed to?


WHITE RABBIT

It isn't directed at all; in fact, there's nothing written on the
_outside_.

[_Takes out a tiny piece of paper._]

It isn't a letter at all; it's a set of verses.


QUEEN

Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?

[_The jury brightens up._]


WHITE RABBIT

[_Looks at the KNAVE'S hand. KNAVE hides his hand; the chains rattle._]

No, they're not, and that's the queerest thing about it.

[_The jury looks puzzled._]


KING

He must have imitated somebody else's hand!


KNAVE

Please, your Majesty, I didn't write it and they can't prove I did;
there's no name signed at the end.


KING

If you didn't sign it that only makes the matter worse. You _must_ have
meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed your name like an honest
man.

[_At this there is a general clapping of hands._]


QUEEN

That _proves_ his guilt.


ALICE

It proves nothing of the sort! Why, you don't even know what they're
about.


KING

Read them!


WHITE RABBIT

[_Puts on his monocle._]

Where shall I begin, please your Majesty?


KING

Begin at the beginning and go on till you come to the end, then stop.


WHITE RABBIT

  "They told me you had been to her,
    And mentioned me to him;
  She gave me a good character,
    But said I could not swim.

  "I gave her one, they gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
  They all returned from him to you,
    Though they were mine before.

  "My notion was that you had been
    (Before she had this fit)
  An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.

  "Don't let him know she liked him best,
    For this must ever be
  A secret, kept from all the rest,
    Between yourself and me."


KING

That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet; so now let
the jury--


ALICE

If anyone of them can explain it, I'll give him sixpence. I don't believe
there's an atom of meaning in it.


JURY

She doesn't believe there's an atom of meaning in it.


KING

If there's no meaning in it, that saves a world of trouble, you know, as
we needn't try to find any. And yet I don't know.

[_Spreads out the verses on his knee and studies them._]

I seem to see some meaning after all. "Said I could not swim." You can't
swim, can you?


KNAVE

[_Shakes his head sadly and points to his suit._]

Do I look like it?


KING

All right, so far; "We know it to be true," that's the jury, of course; "I
gave her one, they gave him two" why that must be what he did with the
tarts, you know--


ALICE

But it goes on "they all returned from _him_ to _you_."


KING

[_Triumphantly pointing to the tarts._]

Why, there they are! Nothing can be clearer than that. Then again, "before
she had this fit," you never had fits, my dear, I think?


QUEEN

Never!


KING

Then the words don't _fit_ you.

[_There is dead silence, while the KING looks around at the court with a
smile._]


KING

It's a pun!

[_Everybody laughs. Music._]


KING

Let the jury consider their verdict.


QUEEN

No, no! Sentence first--verdict afterwards.


ALICE

Stuff and nonsense!


QUEEN

[_Furiously._]

Hold your tongue!


ALICE

I won't!


QUEEN

Off with her head!


ALICE

Who cares for you?


QUEEN

Cut it off!


ALICE

You're nothing but a pack of cards!

[_As lights go out and curtain falls all the characters hold their
positions as if petrified._]

CURTAIN


SCENE THREE

[_The curtain rises to show ALICE still asleep in the armchair, the fire
in the grate suffusing her with its glow._]


CARROLL

Wake up, Alice, it is time for tea.

[_Off stage the characters repeat their most characteristic lines, "Off
with her head," "Consider your verdict," "Oh! my fur and whiskers"; the
DUCHESS sneezes, the cat cries, as if the characters were fading away
into the pack of real playing cards which shower through the mirror all
over ALICE. There is music._]


ALICE

[_Wakes, rises, and looks about in surprise and wonderment._]

Why----it was a dream!

CURTAIN






End of Project Gutenberg's Alice in Wonderland, by Alice Gerstenberg

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE IN WONDERLAND ***

***** This file should be named 35688.txt or 35688.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/6/8/35688/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
