The Project Gutenberg EBook of Alice in Wonderland, by Alice Gerstenberg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Alice in Wonderland
       A Dramatization of Lewis Carroll's "Alice's Adventures in
       Wonderland" and "Through the Looking Glass"

Author: Alice Gerstenberg

Release Date: March 26, 2011 [EBook #35688]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALICE IN WONDERLAND ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)









[Illustration]

[Illustration: ALICE: You're Humpty Dumpty! Just like an egg. [Page 24]]




  Alice in Wonderland

  A dramatization of Lewis Carroll's
  "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" and
  "Through the Looking Glass"


  By Alice Gerstenberg

  Author of "The Conscience of Sarah Platt",
  "Unquenched Fire," "A Little World," etc.

  Chicago
  A.C.Mc.Clurg & Co.
  1915




  Copyright
  A. C. McCLURG & CO.
  1915


  Published December, 1915


  Rights to produce this play in all countries of the world
  are reserved by Alice Gerstenberg


  W. F. MAEL PRINTING COMPANY, CHICAGO




[Illustration: TO THE MEMORY OF LEWIS CARROLL]




This dramatic rendering of _Alice in Wonderland_, by Alice Gerstenberg of
Chicago, was produced by The Players Producing Company of Chicago (Aline
Barnsdall and Arthur Bissell), at the Fine Arts Theater, Chicago, February
11, 1915. After a successful run it opened at the Booth Theater, New York,
March 23, 1915.

The scenery and the costumes were designed by William Penhallow Henderson
of Chicago.

The music was written by Eric De Lamarter of Chicago.

The advertising posters and cards were designed by Jerome Blum of Chicago.

The illustrations of the characters of the play in this book were drawn by
J. Allen St. John from photographs by Victor Georg of Chicago.

W. H. Gilmore staged the play with the following cast:

  LEWIS CARROLL       Frank Stirling
  ALICE               Vivian Tobin
  RED QUEEN           Florence LeClercq
  WHITE QUEEN         Mary Servoss
  WHITE RABBIT        Donald Gallaher
  HUMPTY DUMPTY       Alfred Donohoe
  GRYPHON             Fred W. Permain
  MOCK TURTLE         Geoffrey Stein
  MAD HATTER          Geoffrey Stein
  MARCH HARE          Fred W. Permain
  DORMOUSE            J. Gunnis Davis
  FROG FOOTMAN        Walter Kingsford
  DUCHESS             Kenyon Bishop
  CHESHIRE CAT        Alfred Donohoe
  KING OF HEARTS      Frederick Annerly
  QUEEN OF HEARTS     Winifred Hanley
  KNAVE OF HEARTS     Foxhall Daingerfield
  CATERPILLAR         Walter Kingsford
  TWO OF SPADES       Rule Pyott
  FIVE OF SPADES      France Bendtsen
  SEVEN OF SPADES     John A. Rice




Alice in Wonderland


THE SCENES

ACT I

  Scene I--Alice's Home.
  Scene II--The Room in the Looking Glass.
  Scene III--The Hall with Doors.
  Scene IV--The Sea Shore.

ACT II

  Scene----The March Hare's Garden.

ACT III

  Scene I--The Garden of Flowers.
  Scene II--The Court of Hearts.
  Scene III--Alice's Home.

Miss Gerstenberg's manuscript called for costumes after the illustrations
of John Tenniel, and scenery of the simple imaginative type, the "new art"
in the theater.




ALICE IN WONDERLAND




Alice in Wonderland




ACT I


SCENE ONE

_ALICE'S home. LEWIS CARROLL is discovered, playing chess. Golden-haired
ALICE, in a little blue dress, a black kitten in her arms, stands watching
him._


ALICE

That's a funny game, uncle. What did you do then?


CARROLL

A red pawn took a white pawn; this way. You see, Alice, the chessboard is
divided into sixty-four squares, red and white, and the white army tries
to win and the red army tries to win. It's like a battle!


ALICE

With soldiers?


CARROLL

Yes, here are the Kings and Queens they are fighting for. That's the Red
Queen and here's the White Queen.


ALICE

How funny they look!


CARROLL

See the crowns on their heads, and look at their big feet.


ALICE

It's a foot apiece, that's what it is! Do they hump along like this?


CARROLL

Here! You're spoiling the game. I must keep them all in their right
squares.


ALICE

I want to be a queen!


CARROLL

Here _you_ are [_he points to a small white pawn_] here _you_ are in your
little stiff skirt!


ALICE

How do you do, Alice!


CARROLL

And now you are going to move here.


ALICE

Let me move myself.


CARROLL

When you have traveled all along the board this way and haven't been taken
by the enemy you may be a queen.


ALICE

Why do people always play with kings and queens? Mother has them in her
playing cards too. Look!

[_ALICE goes to the mantel and takes a pack of playing cards from the
ledge._]

Here's the King of Hearts and here's his wife; she's the Queen of
Hearts--isn't she cross-looking? wants to bite one's head off.

[_CARROLL moves a pawn._]

You're playing against yourself, aren't you?


CARROLL

That's one way of keeping in practice, Alice; I have friends in the
university who want to beat me.


ALICE

But if you play against yourself I should think you'd want to cheat!


CARROLL

Does a nice little girl like you cheat when she plays against herself?


ALICE

Oh! I _never_ do! I'd scold myself hard. I always pretend I'm _two_ people
too. It's lots of fun, isn't it? Sometimes when I'm all alone I walk up to
the looking glass and talk to the other Alice. She's so silly, that Alice;
she can't do anything by herself. She just mocks me all the time. When I
laugh, she laughs, when I point my finger at her, she points her finger at
me, and when I stick my tongue out at her she sticks her tongue out at me!
Kitty has a twin too, haven't you darling?

[_ALICE goes to the mirror to show Kitty her twin._]


CARROLL

I'll have to write a book some day about Alice--Alice in wonderland,
"Child of the pure unclouded brow and dreaming eyes of wonder!" or, Alice
through the looking glass!


ALICE

Don't you wish sometimes you could go into looking-glass house? See!

[_ALICE stands on an armchair and looks into the mirror._]

There's the room you can see through the glass; it's just the same as our
living-room here, only the things go the other way. I can see all of
it--all but the bit just behind the fireplace. Oh! I do wish I could see
that bit! I want so much to know if they've a fire there. You never _can_
tell, you know, unless our fire smokes. Then smoke comes up in that room
too--but that may be just to make it look as if they had a fire--just to
pretend they had. The books are something like our books, only the words
go the wrong way. Won't there ever be any way of our getting through,
uncle?


CARROLL

Do you think Kitty would find looking-glass milk digestible?


ALICE

It doesn't sound awful good, does it; but I might leave her at home. She's
been into an awful lot of mischief today. She found sister's knitting and
chased the ball all over the garden where sister was playing croquet with
the neighbors. And I ran and ran after the naughty little thing until I
was all out of breath and so tired! I am tired.

[_She yawns and makes herself comfortable in the armchair._]


CARROLL

[_Replaces the playing cards on the mantel and consults his watch._]

Take a nap. Yes, you have time before tea.


ALICE

[_Half asleep._]

We're going to have mock turtle soup for supper! I heard mamma tell the
cook not to pepper it too much.


CARROLL

What a funny little rabbit it is, nibbling all the time!

[_He leans gently over the back of her chair, and seeing that she is
going to sleep puts out the lamp light and leaves the room. A red glow
from the fireplace illumines ALICE._]

[_Dream music. A bluish light reveals the RED CHESS QUEEN and the WHITE
CHESS QUEEN in the mirror._]


RED QUEEN

[_Points to ALICE and says in a mysterious voice._]

There she is, let's call her over.


WHITE QUEEN

Do you think she'll come?


RED QUEEN

I'll call softly, Alice!


WHITE QUEEN

Hist, Alice.


RED QUEEN

Alice!


WHITE QUEEN

Hush--if she wakes and catches us--


BOTH QUEENS

Alice, come through into looking-glass house!

[_Their hands beckon her._]


ALICE

[_Rises, and talks sleepily. The Queens disappear. ALICE climbs from the
arm of the chair to the back of another and so on up to the mantel ledge,
where she picks her way daintily between the vases._]

I--don't--know--how--I--can--get--through. I've tried--before--but the
glass was hard--and I was afraid of cutting--my fingers--

[_She feels the glass and is amazed to find it like gauze._]

Why, it's soft like gauze; it's turning into a sort of mist; why, it's
easy to get through! _Why--why_--I'm going _through_!

[_She disappears._]


SCENE TWO

[_Is Scene One, reversed. The portieres are black and red squares like a
chessboard. A soft radiance follows the characters mysteriously. As the
curtain rises ALICE comes through the looking glass; steps down, looks
about in wonderment and goes to see if there is a "fire." The RED QUEEN
rises out of the grate and faces her haughtily._]


ALICE

Why, you're the Red Queen!


RED QUEEN

Of course I am! Where do you come from? And where are you going? Look up,
speak nicely, and don't twiddle your fingers!


ALICE

I only wanted to see what the looking glass was like. Perhaps I've lost my
way.


RED QUEEN

I don't know what you mean by your way; all the ways about here belong to
_me_. Curtsey while you're thinking what to say. It saves time.


ALICE

I'll try it when I go home; the next time I'm a little late for dinner.


RED QUEEN

It's time for you to answer now; open your mouth a _little_ wider when you
speak, and always say, "Your Majesty." I suppose you don't want to lose
your name?


ALICE

No, indeed.


RED QUEEN

And yet I don't know, only think how convenient it would be if you could
manage to go home without it! For instance, if the governess wanted to
call you to your lessons, she would call out "come here," and there she
would have to leave off, because there wouldn't be any name for her to
call, and of course you wouldn't have to go, you know.


ALICE

That would never do, I'm sure; the governess would never think of excusing
me from lessons for that. If she couldn't remember my name, she'd call me
"Miss," as the servants do.


RED QUEEN

Well, if she said "Miss," and didn't say anything more, of course you'd
miss your lessons. I dare say you can't even read this book.


ALICE

It's all in some language I don't know. Why, it's a looking-glass book, of
course! And if I hold it up to a glass, the words will all go the right
way again.

  JABBERWOCKY

  'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
    Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
  All mimsy were the borogoves,
    And the mome raths outgrabe.

It seems very pretty, but it's _rather_ hard to understand; somehow it
seems to fill my head with ideas--only I don't exactly know what they are.


RED QUEEN

I daresay you don't know your geography either. Look at the map!

[_She takes a right angle course to the portieres and points to them with
her sceptre._]


ALICE

It's marked out just like a big chessboard. I wouldn't mind being a pawn,
though of course I should like to be a Red Queen best.


RED QUEEN

That's easily managed. When you get to the eighth square you'll be a
Queen. It's a huge game of chess that's being played--all over the world.
Come on, we've got to run. Faster, don't try to talk.


ALICE

I can't.


RED QUEEN

Faster, faster.


ALICE

Are we nearly there?


RED QUEEN

Nearly there! Why, we passed it ten minutes ago. Faster. You may rest a
little now.


ALICE

Why, I do believe we're in the same place. Everything's just as it was.


[Illustration]


RED QUEEN

Of course it is, what would you have it?


ALICE

Well, in our country you'd generally get to somewhere else--if you ran
very fast for a long time as we've been doing.


RED QUEEN

A slow sort of country. Now _here_ you see, it takes all the running _you_
can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you
must run at least twice as fast as that.


ALICE

I'd rather not try, please! I'm quite content to stay here--only I _am_ so
hot and thirsty.


RED QUEEN

I know what you'd like.

[_She takes a little box out of her pocket._]

Have a biscuit?

[_ALICE, not liking to refuse, curtseys as she takes the biscuit and
chokes._]


RED QUEEN

While you're refreshing yourself, I'll just take the measurements.

[_She takes a ribbon out of her pocket and measures the map with it._]

At the end of two yards I shall give you your directions--have another
biscuit?


ALICE

No thank you, one's _quite_ enough.


RED QUEEN

Thirst quenched, I hope? At the end of three yards I shall repeat
them--for fear of your forgetting them. At the end of _four_, I shall say
good-bye. And at the end of five, I shall go! That Square belongs to
Humpty Dumpty and that Square to the Gryphon and Mock Turtle and that
Square to the Queen of Hearts. But you make no remark?


ALICE

I--I didn't know I had to make one--just then.


RED QUEEN

You _should_ have said, "It's extremely kind of you to tell me all this,"
however, we'll suppose it said. Four! Good-bye! Five!

[_RED QUEEN vanishes in a gust of wind behind the portieres. Rabbit
music. WHITE RABBIT comes out of the fireplace and walks about the room
hurriedly. He wears a checked coat, carries white kid gloves in one hand,
a fan in the other and takes out his watch to look at it anxiously._]


WHITE RABBIT

Oh the Duchess! the Duchess! Oh! won't she be savage if I've kept her
waiting!


ALICE

I've never seen a rabbit with a waistcoat and a watch! And a waistcoat
pocket! If you please, sir--


WHITE RABBIT

Oh!

[_He drops fan and gloves in fright and dashes out by way of the portieres
in a gust of wind. ALICE picks up the fan and playfully puts on the
gloves. The portieres flap in the breeze and a shawl flies in._]


ALICE

[_Catches the shawl and looks about for the owner; then meets the WHITE
QUEEN._]

I'm very glad I happened to be in the way.


WHITE QUEEN

[_Runs in wildly, both arms stretched out wide as if she were flying, and
cries in a helpless frightened way._]

Bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter.


ALICE

Am I addressing the White Queen?


WHITE QUEEN

Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing. It isn't my notion of the thing,
at all.


ALICE

If your Majesty will only tell me the right way to begin, I'll do it as
well as I can.


WHITE QUEEN

But I don't want it done at all. I've been a-dressing myself for the last
two hours.


ALICE

Every single thing's crooked, and you're all over pins; may I put your
shawl straight for you?


WHITE QUEEN

I don't know what's the matter with it! It's out of temper. I've pinned it
here, and I've pinned it there, but there's no pleasing it.


ALICE

It _can't_ go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side, and dear
me, what a state your hair is in!


WHITE QUEEN

The brush has got entangled in it! And I lost the comb yesterday.


ALICE

[_Takes out the brush and arranges the QUEEN'S hair._]

You look better now! But really you should have a lady's maid!


WHITE QUEEN

I'm sure I'll take you with pleasure. Two pence a week and jam every other
day.


ALICE

[_Who cannot help laughing._]

I don't want you to hire me--and I don't care for jam.


WHITE QUEEN

It's very good jam.


ALICE

Well, I don't want any today, at any rate.


WHITE QUEEN

You couldn't have it if you _did_ want it. The rule is, jam tomorrow and
jam yesterday--but never jam today.


ALICE

It must come sometimes to "jam today."


WHITE QUEEN

No, it can't, it's jam every _other_ day; today isn't any _other_ day, you
know.


ALICE

I don't understand you, it's dreadfully confusing!


WHITE QUEEN

That's the effect of living backwards, it always makes one a little giddy
at first--


ALICE

Living backwards! I never heard of such a thing!


WHITE QUEEN

But there's one great advantage in it--that one's memory works both ways.


ALICE

I'm sure _mine_ only works one way. I can't remember things before they
happen.


WHITE QUEEN

It's a poor sort of memory that only works backwards.


ALICE

What sort of things do you remember best?


WHITE QUEEN

Oh, things that happened the week after next. For instance now:

[_She sticks a large piece of plaster on her finger._]

There's the King's messenger--he's in prison being punished; and the trial
doesn't even begin till next Wednesday; and of course the crime comes last
of all.


ALICE

Suppose he never commits the crime?


WHITE QUEEN

[_Binding the plaster with ribbon._]

That would be all the better, wouldn't it?


ALICE

Of course it would be all the better, but it wouldn't be all the better
his being punished.


WHITE QUEEN

You're wrong _there_, at any rate; were _you_ ever punished?


ALICE

Only for faults.


WHITE QUEEN

And you were all the better for it, I know!


ALICE

Yes, but then I _had_ done the things I was punished for; that makes all
the difference.


WHITE QUEEN

But if you hadn't done them that would have been better still; better and
better and better!


ALICE

There's a mistake somewhere--


WHITE QUEEN

[_Screams like an engine whistle, and shakes her hand._]

Oh, Oh, Oh! My finger's bleeding. Oh, Oh, Oh!


ALICE

What _is_ the matter? Have you pricked your finger?


WHITE QUEEN

I haven't pricked it yet--but I soon shall--Oh, Oh, Oh!


ALICE

When do you expect to do it?


WHITE QUEEN

When I fasten my shawl again; the brooch will come undone directly. Oh,
Oh!

[_Brooch flies open and she clutches it wildly._]


ALICE

Take care! you're holding it all crooked!


WHITE QUEEN

[_Pricks her finger and smiles._]

That accounts for the bleeding, you see; now you understand the way things
happen here.


ALICE

But why don't you scream now?


[Illustration]


WHITE QUEEN

Why, I've done all the screaming already. What would be the good of having
it all over again? Oh! it's time to run if you want to stay in the same
place! Come on!


ALICE

No, no! Not so fast! I'm getting dizzy!!


WHITE QUEEN

Faster, faster!


ALICE

Everything's black before my eyes!

[_There is music, and the sound of rushing wind, and in the darkness the
WHITE QUEEN cries: "Faster, faster"; ALICE gasps: "I can't--please stop";
and the QUEEN replies: "Then you can't stay in the same place. I'll have
to drop you behind. Faster--faster, good-bye."_]


SCENE THREE

_When the curtain rises one sees nothing but odd black lanterns with
orange lights, hanging, presumably, from the sky. The scene lights up
slowly revealing ALICE seated on two large cushions. She has been "dropped
behind" by the WHITE QUEEN and is dazed to find herself in a strange hall
with many peculiar doors and knobs too high to reach._


ALICE

Oh! my head! Where am I? Oh dear, Oh dear!

[_She staggers up and to her amazement finds herself smaller than the
table._]

I've never been smaller than any table before! I've always been able to
reach the knobs! What a curious feeling. Oh! I'm shrinking. It's the
fan--the gloves!

[_She throws them away, feels her head and measures herself against table
and doors._]

Oh! saved in time! But I never--never--


WHITE RABBIT

Oh! my fan and gloves! Where _are_ my--


ALICE

Oh! Mr. Rabbit--please help me out--I want to go home--I want to go home--


WHITE RABBIT

Oh! the Duchess! Oh! my fur and whiskers! She'll get me executed, as sure
as ferrets are ferrets! Oh! _you_ have them!


ALICE

I'm sorry--you dropped them, you know--


WHITE RABBIT

[_Picks up fan and gloves and patters off._]

She'll chop off your head!


ALICE

If you please sir--where am I?--won't you please--tell me how to get
out--I want to get out--


WHITE RABBIT

[_Looking at his watch._]

Oh! my ears and whiskers, how late it's getting.

[_A trap door gives way and RABBIT disappears. ALICE dashes after only in
time to have the trap door bang in her face._]


ALICE

[_Amazed._]

It's a rabbit-hole--I'm small enough to fit it too! If I shrink any more
it might end in my going out altogether like a candle. I wonder what I
would be like then! What does the flame of a candle look like after the
candle is blown out? I've never seen such a thing!


HUMPTY DUMPTY

[_Sits on the wall._]

Don't stand chattering to yourself like that, but tell me your name and
your business.


ALICE

My _name_ is Alice, but--


HUMPTY DUMPTY

It's a stupid name enough, what does it mean?


ALICE

_Must_ a name mean something?


HUMPTY DUMPTY

Of course it must; _my_ name means the shape I am--and a good, handsome
shape it is, too. With a name like yours, you might be any shape, almost.


ALICE

You're Humpty Dumpty! Just like an egg.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

It's _very_ provoking, to be called an egg--_very_.


ALICE

I said you _looked_ like an egg, Sir, and some eggs are very pretty, you
know.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

Some people have no more sense than a baby.


ALICE

Why do you sit here all alone?


HUMPTY DUMPTY

Why, because there's nobody with me. Did you think I didn't know the
answer to _that_? Ask another.


ALICE

Don't you think you'd be safer down on the ground? That wall's so very
narrow.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

What tremendously easy riddles you ask! Of course I don't think so. Take a
good look at me! I'm one that has spoken to a king, I am; to show you I'm
not proud, you may shake hands with me!

[_He leans forward to offer ALICE his hand but she is too small to reach
it._]

However, this conversation is going on a little too fast; let's go back to
the last remark but one.


ALICE

I'm afraid I can't remember it.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

In that case we start fresh, and it's my turn to choose a subject.


ALICE

You talk about it just as if it were a game.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

So here's a question for you. How old did you say you were?


ALICE

Seven years and six months.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

Wrong! You never said a word about it. Now if you'd asked _my_ advice, I'd
have said, "Leave off at seven--but--"


ALICE

I never ask advice about growing.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

Too proud?


ALICE

What a beautiful belt you've got on. At least, a beautiful cravat, I
should have said--no, a belt, I mean--I beg your pardon. If only I knew
which was neck and which was waist.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

It is a--_most--provoking_--thing, when a person doesn't know a cravat
from a belt.


ALICE

I know it's very ignorant of me.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

It's a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. There's glory for
you.


ALICE

I don't know what you mean by "glory."


HUMPTY DUMPTY

When I use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean--neither more
nor less.


ALICE

The question is, whether you _can_ make words mean different things.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

The question is, which is to be master--that's all. Impenetrability!
That's what I say!


ALICE

Would you tell me, please, what that means?


HUMPTY DUMPTY

I meant by "impenetrability" that we've had enough of that subject, and it
would be just as well if you'd mention what you mean to do next, as I
suppose you don't mean to stop here all the rest of your life.


ALICE

That's a great deal to make one word mean.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

When I make a word do a lot of work like that I always pay it extra.


ALICE

Oh!


HUMPTY DUMPTY

Ah, you should see 'em come round me of a Saturday night, for to get their
wages, you know. That's all--Good-bye.


ALICE

Good-bye till we meet again.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

I shouldn't know you again, if we _did_ meet, you're so exactly like other
people.


ALICE

The face is what one goes by, generally.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

That's just what I complain of. Your face is the same as everybody
has--the two eyes--so--nose in the middle, mouth under. It's always the
same. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side of the nose, for
instance--or the mouth at the top--that would be _some_ help.


ALICE

It wouldn't look nice.


HUMPTY DUMPTY

Wait till you've tried! Good-bye.

[_He disappears as he came._]


ALICE

Oh! I forgot to ask him how to--

[_She tries to open the doors. They are all locked; she begins to weep.
She walks weeping to a high glass table and sits down on its lower ledge.
She sits on a big golden key and picks it up in surprise. She tries it on
all the doors but it does not fit. She weeps and weeps--and Wonderland
grows dark to her in her despair. In the darkness she cries, "Oh! I'm
slipping! Oh, Oh! it's a lake; Oh! my tears! I'm floating!" A mysterious
light shows a "Drink me" sign around a bottle on the top of the table.
ALICE floats up to it panting, and holding on to the edge of the table
takes up the bottle._]


ALICE

It isn't marked poison.

[_She sips at it._]

This is good! Tastes like cherry tart, custard, pineapple, roast turkey,
toffy and hot buttered toast--all together. Oh! Oh! I'm letting out like a
telescope.

[_A mysterious light shows her lengthening out._]

[_Music._]

But the lake is rising too. Oh! Oh! it's deep! I'm drowning. Help, help,
I'm drowning, I'm drowning in my tears!


GRYPHON

Hjckrrh. Hjckrrh!

[_The GRYPHON, a huge green creature with big glittering wings, appears
where HUMPTY DUMPTY had been and reaches glittering claws over to grab and
save ALICE._]


SCENE FOUR

_Is symbolic of a wet and rocky shore in a weird green light. The MOCK
TURTLE is weeping dismally._


GRYPHON

Hjckrrh. Hjckrrh. Hjckrrh.


MOCK TURTLE

[_Answers with his weeping._]


GRYPHON

[_Drags ALICE in._]

Drop your tears into the sea with his.


ALICE

He sobs as if he had a bone in his throat. He sighs as if his heart would
break. What is his sorrow?


MOCK TURTLE

Oh, Gryphon, it's terrible!


GRYPHON

It's all his fancy that. Mock Turtle hasn't got no sorrow. This here young
lady, she wants for to know your history, she do.


MOCK TURTLE

I'll tell it her. Sit down both of you, and don't speak a word till I've
finished.


ALICE

I don't see how you can _ever_ finish, if you don't begin.


MOCK TURTLE

Once, I was a real Turtle.

[_A long silence is broken only by the exclamations, "Hjckrrh," of the
GRYPHON and the heavy sobbing of the MOCK TURTLE._]


MOCK TURTLE

When we were little, we went to school in the sea. The master was an old
Turtle--we used to call him tortoise--


ALICE

Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?


MOCK TURTLE

We called him Tortoise because he taught us; really you are very dull.


GRYPHON

You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question.
Drive on, old fellow! Don't be all day about it!


MOCK TURTLE

Yes, we went to school in the sea, tho' you mayn't believe it--


ALICE

I never said I didn't.


MOCK TURTLE

You did.


GRYPHON

Hold your tongue!


MOCK TURTLE

We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day.


ALICE

I've been to a day school too; you needn't be so proud as all that.


MOCK TURTLE

With extras?


ALICE

Yes, we learned French and music.


MOCK TURTLE

And washing?


ALICE

Certainly not!


[Illustration]


MOCK TURTLE

Ah! Then yours wasn't a really good school. Now at _ours_ they had at the
end of the bill, French, music, _and washing_--extra.


ALICE

You couldn't have wanted it much; living at the bottom of the sea.


MOCK TURTLE

I couldn't afford to learn it, I only took the regular course.


ALICE

What was that?


MOCK TURTLE

Reeling and writhing, of course, to begin with, and then the different
branches of Arithmetic--Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.


ALICE

I never heard of Uglification. What is it?


GRYPHON

Never heard of uglifying! You know what to beautify is, I suppose?


ALICE

Yes, it means--to--make--anything--prettier.


GRYPHON

Well then, if you don't know what to uglify is, you _are_ a simpleton.


ALICE

What else had you to learn?


MOCK TURTLE

Well, there was Mystery; Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography,
then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old conger eel, that used to
come once a week; what _he_ taught us was Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils.


ALICE

What was _that_ like?


MOCK TURTLE

Well, I can't show it you, myself. I'm too stiff. And the Gryphon never
learned it.


GRYPHON

Hadn't time; I went to the Classical master, though. He was an old crab,
_he_ was.


MOCK TURTLE

I never went to him; he taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.


GRYPHON

So he did, so he did.


ALICE

And how many hours a day did you do lessons?


MOCK TURTLE

Ten hours the first day, nine the next, and so on.


ALICE

What a curious plan!


GRYPHON

That's the reason they're called lessons, because they lessen from day to
day.


ALICE

Then the eleventh day must have been a holiday?


MOCK TURTLE

Of course it was.


ALICE

And how did you manage on the twelfth?


GRYPHON

That's enough about lessons, tell her something about the games now.

[_MOCK TURTLE sighs deeply, draws back of one flapper across his eyes. He
looks at ALICE and tries to speak but sobs choke his voice._]


GRYPHON

[_Punching him in the back._]

Same as if he had a bone in his throat.


MOCK TURTLE

[_With tears running down his cheeks._]

You may not have lived much under the sea--


ALICE

I haven't.


MOCK TURTLE

And perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster.


ALICE

I once tasted--no, never!


MOCK TURTLE

So you can have no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster Quadrille is.


ALICE

No, indeed. What sort of a dance is it?


GRYPHON

Why, you first form into a line along the seashore.


MOCK TURTLE

Two lines; seals, turtles, salmon, and so on; then, when you've cleared
all the jellyfish out of the way--


GRYPHON

_That_ generally takes some time.


MOCK TURTLE

You advance twice--


GRYPHON

Each with a lobster as a partner.


MOCK TURTLE

Of course, advance twice, set to partners.


GRYPHON

Change lobsters, and retire in same order.


MOCK TURTLE

Then you know, you throw the--


GRYPHON

The lobsters!


MOCK TURTLE

As far out to sea as you can--


GRYPHON

Swim after them!


MOCK TURTLE

Turn a somersault in the sea.


GRYPHON

Change lobsters again!


MOCK TURTLE

Back to land again, and--that's all the first figure.


ALICE

It must be a very pretty dance.


MOCK TURTLE

Would you like to see a little of it?


ALICE

Very much indeed.


MOCK TURTLE

Come, let's try the first figure. We can do it without lobsters, you know;
which shall sing?


GRYPHON

Oh, _you_ sing, I've forgotten the words.

[_Creatures solemnly dance round and round ALICE, treading on her toes,
waving fore-paws to mark time while MOCK TURTLE sings._]

  First Verse

  "Will you walk a little faster!" said a whiting to a snail,
  "There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.
  See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
  They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?
  Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
  Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?

  Second Verse

  "You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
  When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!"
  But the snail replied, "Too far, too far!" and gave a look askance--
  Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
  Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
  Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

[_The creatures dance against ALICE, pushing her back and forth between
them. She protests and finally escapes; they bump against each other._]


ALICE

Thank you; it's a very interesting dance to watch, and I do so like that
curious song about the whiting.


MOCK TURTLE

Oh, as to the whiting, they--you've seen them, of course?


ALICE

Yes, I've often seen them at din--

[_Checks herself hastily._]


MOCK TURTLE

I don't know where Din may be, but if you've seen them so often, of course
you know what they're like.


ALICE

I believe so, they have their tails in their mouths--and they're all over
crumbs.


MOCK TURTLE

You're wrong about the crumbs, crumbs would all wash off in the sea. But
they _have_ their tails in their mouths; and the reason is--

[_MOCK TURTLE yawns and shuts his eyes._]

Tell her about the reason and all that.


GRYPHON

The reason is, that they _would_ go with the lobsters to the dance. So
they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long way. So they got
their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn't get them out again.
That's all.


ALICE

Thank you, it's very interesting. I never knew so much about a whiting
before.


GRYPHON

I can tell you more than that, if you like. Do you know why it's called a
whiting?


ALICE

I never thought about it. Why?


GRYPHON

_It does the boots and shoes._


ALICE

Does the boots and shoes!


GRYPHON

Why, what are _your_ shoes done with? I mean, what makes them so shiny?


ALICE

They're done with blacking, I believe.


GRYPHON

Boots and shoes under the sea, are done with whiting. Now you know.


ALICE

And what are they made of?


GRYPHON

Soles and eels, of course; any shrimp could have told you that.


ALICE

If I'd been the whiting, I'd have said to the porpoise, "Keep back,
please; we don't want _you_ with us."


MOCK TURTLE

They were obliged to have him with them, no wise fish would go anywhere
without a porpoise.


ALICE

Wouldn't it really?


MOCK TURTLE

Of course not; why if a fish came to me and told me he was going a
journey, I should say, "With what porpoise?"


ALICE

Don't you mean purpose?


MOCK TURTLE

I mean what I say.


[Illustration]


GRYPHON

Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille? Or would you like
the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?


ALICE

Oh, a song please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind.


GRYPHON

Um! No accounting for tastes! Sing her "Turtle Soup," will you, old
fellow?


MOCK TURTLE

[_Sighs deeply and sometimes choked with sobs, sings._]

  "Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
  Waiting in a hot tureen!
  Who for such dainties would not stoop?
  Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
  Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
  Beau--ootiful Soo--op,
  Beau--ootiful Soo--oop,
  Soo--oop of the e-e-evening,
  Beautiful, beautiful Soup."


WHITE RABBIT

[_Enters, stretching out a red and white checked sash with which he
separates ALICE from the creatures._]

Check!


MOCK TURTLE

They won't let her stay in our square.


WHITE RABBIT

The Queen is coming this way.


GRYPHON

She'll chop our heads off. Come on, come on, let's fly!

[_The MOCK TURTLE and GRYPHON grab ALICE and fly into the air._]


CURTAIN

[_The Curtain rises to reveal small silhouettes of the GRYPHON, MOCK
TURTLE, and ALICE in an orange-colored moon far away in the sky. Down
below the WHITE RABBIT is shouting to them, "You'll be safe in the March
Hare's garden."_]

CURTAIN




ACT II


SCENE

_The March Hare's garden, showing part of the Duchess' house. On a small
platform there is a tea table, set with many cups, continuing into wings
to give impression of limitless length. THE MARCH HARE, HATTER, and
DORMOUSE are crowded at one end. ALICE sits on the ground where she has
been dropped from the sky. Finding herself not bruised she rises and
approaches the table._


MARCH HARE and HATTER

No room! No room!


ALICE

There's plenty of room!

[_She sits in a large armchair at one end of the table._]

I don't know who you are.


MARCH HARE

I am the March Hare, that's the Hatter, and this is the Dormouse. Have
some wine?


ALICE

I don't see any wine.


MARCH HARE

There isn't any.


ALICE

Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it.


MARCH HARE

It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being invited.


ALICE

I didn't know it was _your_ table; it's laid for a great many more than
three.


HATTER

Your hair wants cutting.


ALICE

You should learn not to make personal remarks; it's very rude.


HATTER

Why is a raven like a writing-desk?


ALICE

Come, we shall have some fun now! I'm glad you've begun asking riddles--I
believe I can guess that.


MARCH HARE

So you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?


[Illustration: HATTER: Your hair wants cutting.]


ALICE

Exactly so.


MARCH HARE

Then you should say what you mean.


ALICE

I do; at least--at least I mean what I say--that's the same thing, you
know.


HATTER

Not the same thing a bit! Why, you might just as well say that "I see what
I eat" is the same thing as, "I eat what I see!"


MARCH HARE

You might just as well say that "I like what I get," is the same thing as
"I get what I like."


DORMOUSE

You might just as well say that "I breathe when I sleep" is the same thing
as "I sleep when I breathe."


HATTER

It _is_ the same thing with you.

[_Takes out his watch, looks at it uneasily, shakes it, holds it to his
ear._]

What day of the month is it?


ALICE

The fourth.


HATTER

Two days wrong. I told you butter wouldn't suit the works!


MARCH HARE

It was the _best_ butter.


HATTER

Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well; you shouldn't have put it
in with the bread-knife--


MARCH HARE

[_Takes the watch, looks at it gloomily, dips it into his cup of tea and
looks at it again but doesn't know what else to say._]

It was the _best_ butter, you know.


ALICE

What a funny watch! It tells the day of the month, and doesn't tell what
o'clock it is.


HATTER

Why should it? Does _your_ watch tell you what year it is?


ALICE

Of course not, but that's because it stays the same year for such a long
time together.


HATTER

Which is just the case with _mine_.


ALICE

I don't quite understand you. What you said had no sort of meaning in it
and yet it was certainly English.


HATTER

[_Pouring some hot tea on the DORMOUSE'S nose._]

The Dormouse is asleep again.


DORMOUSE

Of course, of course, just what I was going to remark myself.


HATTER

Have you guessed the riddle yet?


ALICE

No, I give it up, what's the answer?


HATTER

I haven't the slightest idea.


MARCH HARE

Nor I.


ALICE

I think you might do something better with the time, than wasting it in
asking riddles that have no answers.


HATTER

If you knew Time as well as I do, you wouldn't talk about wasting _it_.
It's _him_.


ALICE

I don't know what you mean.


HATTER

Of course you don't. I dare say you never even spoke to Time.


ALICE

Perhaps not, but I know I have to beat time when I learn music.


HATTER

Ah, that accounts for it. He won't stand beating. Now, if you only kept on
good terms with him, he'd do almost anything you liked with the clock. For
instance, suppose it were nine o'clock in the morning, just time to begin
lessons. You'd only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling! Half past one, time for dinner.


MARCH HARE

I only wish it was.


ALICE

That would be grand, certainly, but then--I shouldn't be hungry for it,
you know.


HATTER

Not at first, perhaps, but you could keep it to half past one as long as
you liked.


ALICE

Is that the way _you_ manage?


HATTER

Not I, we quarreled last March--just before _he_ went mad, you know. It
was at the great concert given by the Queen of Hearts and I had to sing.

  "Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
  How I wonder what you're at!"

You know the song, perhaps.


ALICE

I've heard something like it.


DORMOUSE

Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--


HATTER

Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse when the Queen bawled out, "He's
murdering the time! Off with his head!"


ALICE

How dreadfully savage!


HATTER

And ever since that, he won't do a thing I ask! It's always six o'clock
now.


ALICE

Is that the reason so many tea things are put out here?


HATTER

Yes, that's it; it's always tea time, and we've no time to wash the things
between whiles.


ALICE

Then you keep moving round, I suppose?


HATTER

Exactly so, as the things get used up.


ALICE

But when you come to the beginning again?


MARCH HARE

Suppose we change the subject. I vote the young lady tells us a story.


ALICE

I'm afraid I don't know one.


MARCH HARE and HATTER

Then the Dormouse shall. Wake up Dormouse.

[_They pinch him on both sides at once._]


DORMOUSE

[_Opens his eyes slowly and says in a hoarse, feeble voice._]

I wasn't asleep, I heard every word you fellows were saying.


MARCH HARE

Tell us a story.


ALICE

Yes, please do!


HATTER

And be quick about it, or you'll be asleep again before it's done.


DORMOUSE

Once upon a time there were three little sisters, and their names were
Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie and they lived at the bottom of a well--


ALICE

What did they live on?


[Illustration]


DORMOUSE

They lived on treacle.


ALICE

They couldn't have done that, you know, they'd have been ill.


DORMOUSE

So they were, _very_ ill.


ALICE

But why did they live at the bottom of a well?


MARCH HARE

Take some more tea.


ALICE

I've had nothing yet, so I can't take more.


HATTER

You mean, you can't take _less_; it's very easy to take _more_ than
nothing.


ALICE

Nobody asked _your_ opinion.


HATTER

Who's making personal remarks now?


ALICE

[_Helps herself to tea and bread and butter._]

Why did they live at the bottom of a well?


DORMOUSE

[_Takes a minute or two to think._]

It was a treacle-well.


ALICE

There's no such thing!


HATTER and MARCH HARE

Sh! Sh!


DORMOUSE

If you can't be civil, you'd better finish the story for yourself.


ALICE

[_Very humbly._]

No, please go on. I won't interrupt you again. I dare say there may be
_one_.


DORMOUSE

One, indeed! And so these three little sisters--they were learning to
draw, you know--


ALICE

What did they draw?


DORMOUSE

Treacle.


HATTER

I want a clean cup. Let's all move one place on.

[_HATTER moves on, DORMOUSE takes his place, MARCH HARE takes DORMOUSE'S
place and ALICE unwillingly takes MARCH HARE'S place._]


ALICE

I'm worse off than I was before. You've upset the milk jug into your
plate.


MARCH HARE

It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being invited.


ALICE

Where did they draw the treacle from?


HATTER

You can draw water out of a water well, so I should think you could draw
treacle out of a treacle well--eh, stupid?


ALICE

But they were _in_ the well.


DORMOUSE

Of course they were--well in. They were learning to draw, and they drew
all manner of things--everything that begins with an M--


ALICE

Why with an M?


[Illustration]


MARCH HARE

Why not?

[_ALICE is silent and confused. HATTER pinches DORMOUSE to wake him up._]


DORMOUSE

[_Wakes with a little shriek and continues._]

--that begins with an M, such as mousetraps and the moon and memory and
muchness--you know you say things are "much of a muchness"--did you ever
see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?


HATTER

Did you?


ALICE

Really now you ask me, I don't think--


HATTER

Then you shouldn't talk.


MARCH HARE

No!


ALICE

[_Rises and walks away._]

You are very rude. It's the stupidest tea party I ever was at in all my
life--

[_WHITE RABBIT enters carrying a huge envelope with a seal and crown on
it._]


MARCH HARE and HATTER

No room! no room!

[_Rabbit pays no attention to them but goes to the house and raps loudly.
A footman in livery with a round face and large eyes like a frog and
powdered hair opens the door._]


WHITE RABBIT

For the Duchess. An invitation from the Queen to play croquet.


FROG

From the Queen. An invitation for the Duchess to play croquet.

[_WHITE RABBIT bows and goes out._]


MARCH HARE and HATTER

[_To WHITE RABBIT._]

No room! No room! No room!

[_The FROG disappears into the house but leaves the door open. There is a
terrible din and many sauce pans fly out._]


MARCH HARE

She's at it again.


HATTER

It's perfectly disgusting.


MARCH HARE

Let's move on.

[_The platform moves off with table, chairs, MARCH HARE, HATTER, and
DORMOUSE. Meanwhile the FROG has come out again and is sitting near the
closed door, staring stupidly at the sky. ALICE goes to the door timidly
and knocks._]


FROG

There's no sort of use in knocking, and that for two reasons: first,
because I'm on the same side of the door as you are; secondly, because
they're making such a noise inside, no one could possibly hear you.


ALICE

Please then, how am I to get in?


FROG

There might be some sense in your knocking if we had the door between us.
For instance, if you were _inside_, you might knock, and I could let you
out, you know.


ALICE

How am I to get in?


FROG

I shall sit here, till tomorrow.

[_The door opens and a large plate skims out straight at the FROG'S
head; it grazes his nose and breaks into pieces._]

[_FROG acts as if nothing had happened._]

Or next day, maybe.


ALICE

How am I to get in?


FROG

_Are_ you to get in at all? That's the first question, you know.


ALICE

It's really dreadful the way all you creatures argue. It's enough to drive
one crazy.


FROG

I shall sit here, on and off, for days and days.


ALICE

But what am I to do?


FROG

Anything you like.

[_He begins to whistle._]


ALICE

Where's the servant whose business it is to answer the door?


FROG

Which door?


ALICE

_This_ door, of course!


[Illustration: FROG: I shall sit here till tomorrow.]


[_The FROG looks at the door, and rubs his thumb on it to see if the
paint will come off._]

[Illustration]


FROG

To answer the door? What's it been asking for?


ALICE

I don't know what you mean.


FROG

I speaks English, doesn't I? Or are you deaf? What did it ask you?


ALICE

Nothing! I've been knocking at it.


FROG

Shouldn't do that--shouldn't do that, vexes it, you know.

[_He kicks the door._]

You let _it_ alone, and it'll let _you_ alone, you know.


ALICE

Oh, there's no use talking to you--

[_She starts to open the door just as the DUCHESS comes out carrying a pig
in baby's clothes. She sneezes--FROG sneezes and ALICE sneezes._]


DUCHESS

If everybody minded her own business--

[_She sneezes._]


ALICE

It's pepper.


DUCHESS

Of course, my cook puts it in the soup.


ALICE

There's certainly too much pepper in the soup.


DUCHESS

Sneeze then and get rid of it!

[_DUCHESS begins to sing to the baby, giving it a violent shake at the end
of every line of the lullaby._]

  "Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes;

[_FROG and ALICE sneeze._]

  He only does it to annoy,
    Because he knows it teases.

[_DUCHESS sneezes, FROG sneezes, ALICE sneezes._]

  I speak severely to my boy,
    I beat him when he sneezes;

[_FROG sneezes, ALICE sneezes._]

  For he can thoroughly enjoy
    The pepper when he pleases!"

[_DUCHESS sneezes, FROG sneezes, ALICE sneezes, DUCHESS gasps and gives a
tremendous sneeze._]


ALICE

Oh dear!

[_She jumps aside as kettles and pots come flying out of the door. The
DUCHESS pays no attention._]

What a cook to have!

[_She calls inside._]

Oh! _please_ mind what you're doing!

[_Another pan comes out and almost hits the baby._]

Oh! there goes his _precious_ nose!


DUCHESS

If everybody minded her own business, the world would go round a deal
faster than it does.


ALICE

Which would not be an advantage. Just think what work it would make with
the day and night! You see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round
on its axis--


DUCHESS

Talking of axes, chop off her head!

[_The head of a grinning Cheshire cat appears in a tree above a wall._]


ALICE

Oh, what's that?


DUCHESS

Cat, of course.


ALICE

Why does it grin like that?


DUCHESS

It's a Cheshire cat! and that's why. [_To baby._] Pig!


[Illustration: DUCHESS: I speak severely to my boy, I beat him when he
sneezes.]


ALICE

I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn't know
that cats _could_ grin.


DUCHESS

They all can and most of 'em do.


ALICE

I don't know of any that do.


DUCHESS

You don't know much and that's a fact. Here, you may nurse it a bit, if
you like!

[_Flings the baby at ALICE._]

I must go and get ready to play croquet with the Queen.

[_She goes into the house._]


ALICE

If I don't take this child away with me, they're sure to kill it in a day
or two. Cheshire Puss, would you tell me please, which way I ought to walk
from here?


CAT

That depends a good deal on where you want to get to.


ALICE

I don't much care where--


CAT

Then it doesn't matter which way you walk.


ALICE

So long as I get _somewhere_.


CAT

Oh, you're sure to do that, if you only walk long enough.


ALICE

Please, will you tell me what sort of people live about here?


CAT

All mad people.


ALICE

But I don't want to go among mad people.


CAT

Oh, you can't help that; we're all mad here. I'm mad. He's mad. He's
dreaming now, and what do you think he's dreaming about?


ALICE

[_Goes to the FROG to scrutinize his face._]

Nobody could guess that.


CAT

Why, about you! And if he left off dreaming about you, where do you
suppose you'd be?

